.TH CLEANROOM 1 "June 2026" "cleanroom 1.24.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cleanroom \- safe-by-default macOS storage cleaner
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cleanroom
.RI "dashboard [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "overview [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "map [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "map-fast [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "snapshot [--json] [--output path]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "snapshot-fast [--json] [--output path]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "diff [before.json after.json] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "state [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "permissions [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "review [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "scan [options]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "system-data [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "system-data-fast [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "plan [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "large [path] [--min-mb n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "brokenlinks [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "brokenlinks-fast [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "quarantine [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "quarantine-fast [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "metadata [path...] [--limit n] [--json] [--apply --trash]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "metadata-fast [path...] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "quicklook [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "fontcaches [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "webcaches [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "savedstate [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "projectcaches [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "projectcaches-fast [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "developer-fast [path] [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "updaters [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "browsercaches [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "caches-fast [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "duplicates [path] [--min-mb n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "documents [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "desktop [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "screenshots [path] [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "archives [path] [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "archives-fast [path] [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "downloads [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "downloads-fast [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "installers [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "nodes [path] [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "nodes-fast [path] [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "venvs [path] [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "venvs-fast [path] [--days n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "apps [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "apps-fast [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "uninstallers [path] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "appreview query... [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "appdata [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "libraries [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "cloud [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "cloudfiles [path] [--min-mb n] [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "personal [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "communications [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "browsers [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "leftovers query... [--limit n] [--json] [--apply --trash]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "backups [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "backups-fast [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "xcode [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "xcode-fast [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "android [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "startup [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "loginitems [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "trash [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "caches [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "diagnostics [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "packages [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "npm-cache [--json] [--apply --yes]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "yarn-cache [--json] [--apply --yes]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "pnpm-store [--json] [--apply --yes]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "cocoapods-cache [--json] [--apply --yes]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "pip-cache [--json] [--apply --yes]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "receipts [--limit n] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "homebrew [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "homebrew-cleanup [--json] [--apply --yes]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "toolchains [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "toolchains-fast [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "containers [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "containers-fast [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "snapshots [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "history [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "report [--output path] [--redact]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "report-fast [--json] [--output path] [--redact]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "clean [options] [--preflight] [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "history [--limit n]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "restore [--log path] [--apply]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "doctor [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "protect [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "guard path... [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "rules [--json]"
.br
.B cleanroom
.RI "interactive [options]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cleanroom
scans common macOS storage bloat locations and cleans rebuildable cache or
artifact data. It is dry-run by default and requires
.B --apply
before deleting files.
.PP
By default it does not delete browser profiles, saved password databases,
Keychains, Photos libraries, Mail, iCloud Drive, or arbitrary personal files.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B dashboard
Show a fast read-only desktop-app storage summary without deep size walks.
.TP
.B overview
Show a deeper read-only storage dashboard with disk state, summaries, and next steps.
.TP
.B map
Rank focused major storage buckets such as Documents, Downloads, user
Applications, Application Support, cloud storage, media, developer data,
package stores, toolchains, container VMs, and Trash.
Buckets may overlap because smaller folders can also be part of larger parents.
.TP
.B snapshot
Write disk state and focused storage-map buckets into a timestamped JSON file
under ~/.local/state/cleanroom/snapshots, or to --output path. With --json,
emit the snapshot to stdout.
.TP
.B snapshot-fast
Write a quick desktop-app snapshot from fast summary buckets. Use deep
.B snapshot
for exhaustive before/after diffs.
.TP
.B diff
Compare two snapshot JSON files and rank bucket deltas. With no paths, compare
the latest two saved snapshots from ~/.local/state/cleanroom/snapshots.
.TP
.B state
Inventory Cleanroom-created apply logs, storage snapshots, and recoverable
~/.Trash/cleanroom-* folders. Cleanup is opt-in for old Cleanroom-created state.
.TP
.B permissions
Audit whether common macOS privacy-sensitive storage locations exist and are
readable/listable by the current terminal or app.
.TP
.B scan
Show disk usage, cleanup candidates, largest home folders, and large files.
.TP
.B review
Show a read-only personal storage checklist with next focused commands.
.TP
.B system-data
Break common macOS System Data locations into review-only buckets with next commands.
.TP
.B system-data-fast
Show a quick desktop-app System Data summary without deep Library sizing.
.TP
.B plan
Rank safe cleanup opportunities and show copyable commands.
.TP
.B large
Deep-scan large files for review without deleting anything.
.TP
.B large-fast
Quickly list large files using Spotlight metadata without deleting anything.
.TP
.B brokenlinks
List dangling symlinks for review without deleting anything.
.TP
.B brokenlinks-fast
Quickly preview shallow dangling symlinks for desktop review.
.TP
.B quarantine
Deep-scan files and apps with macOS quarantine metadata without deleting files or
clearing attributes.
.TP
.B quarantine-fast
Quickly preview bounded Downloads, Desktop, and Applications quarantine metadata.
.TP
.B metadata
Deep-scan removable filesystem metadata clutter such as .DS_Store, AppleDouble
files, __MACOSX folders, Thumbs.db, and Desktop.ini. Applied cleanup requires
.BR --trash .
.TP
.B metadata-fast
Quickly preview removable filesystem metadata clutter using Spotlight metadata.
.TP
.B quicklook
Inventory rebuildable Quick Look thumbnail and preview caches.
.TP
.B fontcaches
Inventory rebuildable user font cache databases without touching actual fonts.
.TP
.B webcaches
Inventory Safari and WebKit cache folders without touching history, cookies,
passwords, bookmarks, website data, or profiles.
.TP
.B savedstate
Inventory saved app window/session restoration state without touching documents
or app profiles.
.TP
.B projectcaches
Inventory known rebuildable project cache artifacts such as __pycache__,
pytest, mypy, ruff, tox, nox, and coverage caches.
.TP
.B updaters
Inventory Sparkle and Squirrel app updater cache and staging folders without
touching apps, app profiles, browser profiles, or passwords.
.TP
.B browsercaches
Inventory Chromium and Firefox browser cache folders without touching profiles,
password databases, cookies, bookmarks, sessions, extensions, or settings.
.TP
.B duplicates
Deep-scan exact duplicate files for review without deleting anything.
.TP
.B duplicates-fast
Quickly preview exact duplicate files using Spotlight size hints without deleting anything.
.TP
.B documents
Rank top-level files and folders in ~/Documents or a provided directory with guard status.
.TP
.B desktop
Rank top-level files and folders on ~/Desktop with guard status.
.TP
.B screenshots
List screenshot and screen recording files for review. Cleanup is opt-in and
limited to known screenshot/recording filenames.
.TP
.B archives
List archive and disk image files for review without deleting anything.
.TP
.B archives-fast
Quickly preview old archives and disk images in Downloads and Desktop, or in a provided path.
.TP
.B downloads
List old files in ~/Downloads for review. Cleanup is opt-in for old downloadable artifacts only.
.TP
.B downloads-fast
Quickly preview old files in ~/Downloads with a bounded top-level scan.
.TP
.B installers
List old downloaded installer files in ~/Downloads for review.
.TP
.B nodes
List stale node_modules folders for review without deleting anything.
.TP
.B venvs
List stale Python virtualenv folders for review without deleting anything.
.TP
.B apps
List largest app bundles for review without uninstalling anything.
.TP
.B uninstallers
List vendor uninstallers, remover apps, packages, and scripts without running
or removing them.
.TP
.B appreview
Review matching app bundles, vendor uninstallers, package receipts, and leftover
candidates in one read-only workflow.
.TP
.B appdata
Rank large app support, container, group-container, HTTP storage, WebKit, and
saved-state folders with central guard status.
.TP
.B libraries
Inventory protected media and creative libraries such as Photos, Music, TV,
iMovie, GarageBand, and Logic without deleting anything.
.TP
.B cloud
Inventory protected cloud-sync folders such as iCloud Drive, CloudStorage,
Dropbox, Google Drive, OneDrive, Box, and Sync without deleting anything.
.TP
.B cloudfiles
List large local files inside cloud-sync roots for review without deleting files
or evicting local copies. Local deletes can sync remotely.
.TP
.B personal
Inventory protected Mail, Messages, Contacts, Calendars, Notes, Reminders,
Voice Memos, and call-history data without deleting anything.
.TP
.B communications
Inventory protected Mail, Mail Downloads, Messages, and Messages Attachments
storage without deleting accounts, chats, attachments, or indexes.
.TP
.B browsers
Inventory browser profile and cache footprint without deleting profiles,
passwords, cookies, bookmarks, sessions, or settings.
.TP
.B leftovers
Find app or vendor leftovers in common support, cache, preference, container,
WebKit, log, and launch-item locations. Plain mode previews. Applied cleanup
requires
.B --trash
so matches are recoverable through the normal apply log and restore flow.
.TP
.B backups
Inventory local iPhone and iPad backups for review without deleting them.
.TP
.B xcode
Inventory Xcode build, archive, DeviceSupport, and simulator storage.
.TP
.B android
Inventory Android SDK, NDK, system image, emulator, AVD, platform, build-tool,
command-line tool, and Android Studio cache storage with safety labels.
.TP
.B startup
List LaunchAgents and LaunchDaemons for review without unloading or removing anything.
.TP
.B loginitems
List user Login Items reported by macOS System Events without disabling or
removing anything.
.TP
.B trash
Inventory current user Trash contents without emptying Trash.
.TP
.B caches
Inventory safe and opt-in cache buckets with preview/apply commands.
.TP
.B caches-fast
Show a quick desktop-app cache summary without deep nested app-cache sizing.
.TP
.B diagnostics
Inventory user logs, diagnostic reports, and CrashReporter data.
.TP
.B packages
Inventory package-manager caches and stores with preview/apply commands.
.TP
.B npm-cache
Run npm's cache verifier, or clean npm cache with --apply.
.TP
.B yarn-cache
Show Yarn cache location, or clean Yarn cache with --apply.
.TP
.B pnpm-store
Run pnpm store status, or prune unreferenced packages with --apply.
.TP
.B cocoapods-cache
List CocoaPods cache, or clean all cached pods with --apply.
.TP
.B pip-cache
Show pip cache info, or purge pip cache with --apply.
.TP
.B receipts
Inventory macOS package installer receipts. Receipts are install records, not
uninstall targets; use vendor uninstallers first, then review matching
leftovers.
.TP
.B homebrew
Inventory Homebrew cache, logs, Cellar, Caskroom, and service/runtime folders.
.TP
.B homebrew-cleanup
Run Homebrew's own cleanup dry-run, or apply it with --apply.
.TP
.B toolchains
Inventory language and toolchain caches such as Go, pip, uv, SwiftPM, Maven,
Composer, RubyGems, and Bundler.
.TP
.B containers
Inventory local container VM disks and image stores for Docker Desktop, Colima,
Lima, and Podman. Cleanup is high-impact and opt-in.
.TP
.B snapshots
List local Time Machine snapshots for review.
.TP
.B report
Generate a Markdown cleanup report. Use
.B --redact
before sharing publicly to mask home, user, and temporary paths.
.TP
.B report-fast
Generate a quick desktop-app privacy report without deep path sizing.
.TP
.B clean
Preview or apply cleanup. Use
.B --preflight
to summarize selected cleanup categories, warnings, and recovery limits without
scanning or deleting files.
.TP
.B history
List recent apply logs.
.TP
.B restore
Restore files moved by --trash from an apply log. Dry-run by default.
.TP
.B rules
List cleanup rules, safety level, opt-in flag, and affected paths.
.TP
.B interactive
Prompt for cleanup categories and then run the same clean flow.
.TP
.B doctor
Check platform, dependencies, disk state, and protected data assumptions.
.TP
.B protect
Audit protected personal data and app profile paths that cleanroom will not
remove wholesale.
.TP
.B guard
Explain whether specific paths are removable by cleanroom's central safety guard.
.TP
.B categories
Explain cleanup categories and safety levels.
.TP
.B init-config
Write a starter config file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --apply
Actually delete selected files.
.TP
.B --trash
Move cleanroom-managed path removals to ~/.Trash/cleanroom-* instead of
deleting them immediately.
.TP
.B --log " path"
Write the apply audit log to a specific file.
.TP
.B --limit " n"
Number of history entries or large files to show.
.TP
.B --min-mb " n"
Minimum file size for large and duplicate review commands. Defaults to 500.
.TP
.B --yes
Skip confirmation prompts.
.TP
.B --preset " safe|dev|ai|deep"
Enable a group of cleanup categories.
.TP
.B --config " path"
Load a config file.
.TP
.B --exclude " path"
Protect a path from deletion.
.TP
.B --include-app-caches
Remove nested app cache folders only.
.TP
.B --include-dev-heavy
Remove heavy developer artifacts such as SDK components and simulator state.
.TP
.B --include-ai-workspaces
Remove generated AI-agent workspace data.
.TP
.B --include-ai-models
Remove downloaded local AI model stores.
.TP
.B --include-containers
Remove local container VM disks and image stores. This can remove containers,
images, and volumes.
.TP
.B --include-diagnostics
Remove old user diagnostic reports and CrashReporter files older than
.BR --days .
.TP
.B --include-user-trash
Empty ~/.Trash during apply. This is irreversible.
.TP
.B --include-installers
Remove old downloaded installer files from ~/Downloads during apply.
.TP
.B --include-download-artifacts
Remove old installers, disk images, and archive files directly under
~/Downloads during apply. Arbitrary documents, photos, folders, and nested
files are not targeted.
.TP
.B --include-screenshots
Remove old screenshot and screen recording files under Desktop, Downloads, and
Documents during apply. Arbitrary images and videos are not targeted.
.TP
.B --include-cleanroom-state
Remove old Cleanroom-created run logs, snapshots, and recoverable
~/.Trash/cleanroom-* folders older than
.BR --days .
This is never enabled by presets.
.TP
.B --include-metadata
Remove filesystem metadata clutter from Desktop, Documents, and Downloads.
.TP
.B --include-quicklook
Remove rebuildable Quick Look thumbnail and preview caches.
.TP
.B --include-font-caches
Remove rebuildable user font cache databases. Actual font files stay protected.
.TP
.B --include-web-caches
Remove Safari and WebKit cache folders only. Browser profile data stays protected.
.TP
.B --include-saved-state
Remove saved app window/session state. Documents and app profiles stay protected.
.TP
.B --include-project-caches
Remove known rebuildable project cache artifacts under Desktop, Documents, and
Downloads. Source, .git, node_modules, and virtualenv folders are pruned.
.TP
.B --include-updater-caches
Remove rebuildable Sparkle/Squirrel app updater cache and staging data.
.TP
.B --include-browser-caches
Remove Chromium and Firefox browser cache folders only. Browser profiles and
credential data stay protected.
.TP
.B --include-device-backups
Move local iPhone/iPad backups older than
.BR --days
to the cleanroom Trash folder. Requires
.BR --trash
and should only be used after confirming another backup exists.
.TP
.B --include-venv-stale
Remove stale Python virtualenv folders older than
.BR --days
when they contain pyvenv.cfg.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
cleanroom overview
cleanroom dashboard --json
cleanroom map --json
cleanroom snapshot --output ~/Desktop/cleanroom-before.json
cleanroom diff ~/Desktop/cleanroom-before.json ~/Desktop/cleanroom-after.json
cleanroom state --json
cleanroom permissions --json
cleanroom scan
cleanroom system-data
cleanroom system-data-fast --json
cleanroom plan --json
cleanroom large ~/Documents --min-mb 250 --limit 30
cleanroom brokenlinks-fast ~/Documents --limit 50
cleanroom brokenlinks ~/Documents --limit 50
cleanroom quarantine ~/Downloads --limit 50
cleanroom duplicates ~/Documents --min-mb 100 --limit 20
cleanroom documents ~/Documents --limit 40
cleanroom desktop --limit 40
cleanroom screenshots ~/Desktop --days 7 --limit 50
cleanroom archives ~/Downloads --days 7 --limit 50
cleanroom archives-fast ~/Downloads --days 7 --limit 50
cleanroom downloads --days 30 --limit 50
cleanroom downloads-fast --days 30 --limit 50
cleanroom installers --days 30 --limit 50
cleanroom nodes ~/Documents --days 45 --limit 30
cleanroom venvs ~/Documents --days 45 --limit 30
cleanroom apps --limit 30
cleanroom uninstallers --limit 50
cleanroom appreview adobe --limit 50
cleanroom appdata --limit 30
cleanroom libraries --json
cleanroom cloud --json
cleanroom cloudfiles --min-mb 250 --limit 50
cleanroom personal --json
cleanroom communications --json
cleanroom browsers --json
cleanroom metadata --json
cleanroom metadata --apply --trash
cleanroom quicklook --json
cleanroom fontcaches --json
cleanroom webcaches --json
cleanroom savedstate --json
cleanroom projectcaches --json
cleanroom updaters --json
cleanroom browsercaches --json
cleanroom leftovers adobe --limit 50
cleanroom leftovers adobe --apply --trash
cleanroom backups --json
cleanroom xcode --json
cleanroom android --json
cleanroom startup --json
cleanroom loginitems --json
cleanroom trash --json
cleanroom caches --json
cleanroom diagnostics --json
cleanroom packages --json
cleanroom npm-cache
cleanroom npm-cache --apply --yes
cleanroom yarn-cache
cleanroom yarn-cache --apply --yes
cleanroom pnpm-store
cleanroom pnpm-store --apply --yes
cleanroom cocoapods-cache
cleanroom cocoapods-cache --apply --yes
cleanroom pip-cache
cleanroom pip-cache --apply --yes
cleanroom receipts --json
cleanroom homebrew --json
cleanroom homebrew-cleanup
cleanroom homebrew-cleanup --apply --yes
cleanroom toolchains --json
cleanroom containers --json
cleanroom snapshots --json
.P
cleanroom history --json
cleanroom report --output cleanroom-report.md
cleanroom report --redact --output cleanroom-report.md
cleanroom doctor --json
cleanroom clean --preset dev
cleanroom clean --preset dev --preflight
cleanroom clean --preset dev --preflight --json
cleanroom clean --preset ai
cleanroom clean --preset ai --preflight
cleanroom clean --preset dev --apply --trash
cleanroom clean --include-user-trash --apply
cleanroom history
cleanroom restore --log ~/.local/state/cleanroom/runs/RUN.log
cleanroom protect --json
cleanroom guard ~/Library/Application\\ Support/Google/Chrome
cleanroom rules --json
cleanroom interactive
.fi
.SH SAFETY
Review dry-run output before using
.B --apply.
Use
.B --exclude
or config excludes to protect custom project paths.
